So he said, okay, you run over there and drive over
there as fast as you can and get back here and we will
hold up and watch you do that. So that boy held up the
processional until I could get back and we walked
up on stage and I had just a notebook and I had an old
speech and I took my pen out and I wrote down on one
single piece of paper some points out of that and
just kind of reviewed the old speech while all the
welcomes and everything had been going on.
Because I only had about 10 minutes until I had to be
up there. And then I got up and gave the
commencement, and I don't think that most of them
ever knew that I wasn't supposed to have been the
one to give it. It was a wonderful time. Did your
colleagues give you any credit later? Oh, yeah. In
fact, when I left the president's office, the
president's staff gave me a big drawing that was
made by a man here on campus that had the major
things that happened during my career at those
levels. And one of them was, here's a picture of
Bill Mobley saying, you're the commencement
speaker this morning. And it had a lot of things in
it. It had like move into the Big 12. I helped get the
new Texas Clipper for the campus at Galveston.
They had that on it. It had the Sweet Sixteen
basketball, which was the only time our girls
basketball team had ever gone that far, and a lot of
things like that. And it had gauges, rules for
administration. They had all ten of them on there.
And I was so proud that they put number one of
integrity, because that was what I tried to
instill through every component that answered to
me. What else have we not? I don't know. Right.
As you walked away from those years of leadership,
for what were you most proud? And then were there
any things that you wish you could have done, but
you weren't able to? I would have to tell you that I
was most proud for two things. One is that when I
have gone back to be introduced, the introduction
has been, here was a leader of character and
integrity. The second was the
advancements that we made in every academic
program at the university and the leadership that
we recruited to lead those programs.
What
would I like to have seen happen that I didn't get
done?
That's a tough question.
Probably the final resolution to some of the
difficult issues that I was bringing to closure at
the time.
That it would have been best had there been a longer
period passed from the time I brought it to closure
to the time a new person had taken it. Because they
still had to live with a little of that around That
really would have been it. And somebody sitting
here might not tell you that, but in all honesty, I
would want people to know that. I really would. In
the search processes, as we now do it, with
comparatively long and involved, lots of
committees, In fact, are those searches as
successful as they used to be when they were done
more direct? I personally do not think so because I
think too many times in search processes that in
the academic area that too much is placed on what
the resume, the curriculum VT, the academic
credential might be with a real vacuum of looking,
can that person lead people? And I tell you, I
didn't use that philosophy when I would go talk to
people about recruiting a dean or department
head. I would tell them, I want to see written into
this that this person is also a leader and can lead
and has administrative abilities. Because I
said, we could bring a National Academy of Science
person in here that couldn't administrate their
way out of a paper bag. I said, we want to do a
background to know that they can lead. And I said, I
want you to ask questions. I'm going to ask
questions. I'm going to look at that. So don't
bring me somebody only on paper. And I think that it
gets so wound up today in just the academic
credential side, the curriculum VT side, rather
than what are their people skills, because
leadership could be summed up in one word.
Leadership is people. Period. The people skills.
Earl Rudder wasn't much of a scholar, and Jack
Williams wasn't a native Texan that hadn't been to
A&M, but they both did a good job because they had
some, and they both had integrity. That's right.
Now, throughout all this, what role did your
faith, your personal faith play? My personal
faith played an enormous part in it. mainly
because it kept me on the straight and narrow track
that I would never do anything that would be
questionable. I would never compromise the truth
or integrity in any way. And I was very
committed to the fact that my character would
outlast and my name would outlast any other thing.
You know, I'll be honest with you, every morning I
would have a prayer. And my prayer was that I would
have the sound wisdom that day to make the right
judgment decision on the many decisions that I had
to make. And secondly, that my own personal
character and integrity would never be
compromised or questioned by anyone around me.
And you were a member of what congregation? I was a
member of Central Baptist Church here at Bryan
College Station. All those years? All those
years. And still? That's right. And it was a
growing congregation, but comparatively small
in the 70s and 80s, wasn't it? Oh, yeah, compared to
where it is now. It's 5,000 members now. It just
bought 65 acres to look to relocate and expand
again. Let's make believe that you are now hired to
be a consultant to Texas A&M. What advice would you
give Texas A&M and its leadership today? I would
give them the advice to never compromise the
traditions and value systems of the past and to
recruit leadership that would be committed to
what this university stands for. and to put in
place a strategic plan
that this leadership could buy into to move this
university to top 10 status. I think a lot of that's
already in place, but I would not want to see anyone
come in and deviate away from those. We see so many
other institutions, both academic, higher
education, and other, that have begun to cave in to
political correctness over what is right. And it
takes a lot of courage today for administrators to
stand up and to make the decisions that are based on
what's right and what's wrong, what's honest,
what's integrity. and not cave in to the political
correctness crowd that's out there. To stay the
course. I think they'll gain greater respect and
achieve a whole lot more if they will do that.
What did you learn here as an A&M student? that
proved to be important to you later what did you
learn about as an Aggie well I learned so much as an
Aggie about I
really believe the values and things in life that
are important as well as a work ethic and I a respect
for that which had been given to me in the way of a
trust of my being a graduate of this institution to
the point that I would never want to do anything
that would reflect negatively on this
university. To me, it was similar to growing up as a
young man. I didn't want to do anything that my mom
and dad would be ashamed of me doing. Well, I never
wanted to do anything that my university would be
ashamed of me doing.
That was so reinforced through just the trust, I
think, that had been put in us to be a student and the
privilege of being a student here. Maybe it was
because I had to work so hard to be able to work my way
through this university. It was not something
given to me. It was only given to me through great
sacrifice of my parents and myself. So I learned a
lot of that as a student here that carried on
through really the rest of my life. I also learned
what it meant to care for other people. You hear
this, it's the Aggie family, it's the Aggie
spirit. That's still true. And you learn to care
for what happens to those around you. And when they
have a need, you go to them. When you have a need,
they come to you.
Those are the main ones. All right. Typist, take
this question and the response and put it back two
or three questions. I should have asked this just
before ask about the consultant. as you look back
on all your A&M years, to whom, and if all the people
involved in those years could be called together,
to which ones would you express the greatest
appreciation for what they've meant to you?
To whom are you most grateful? I would be most
grateful to Al Price, who was the dean of
veterinary college early. and when I was a faculty
member at A&M the first time as a student, and then
later after I'd been to Auburn as a faculty member,
to George Shelton for bringing me back here in
1982, and clearly to Bill Mobley when he was
president of the university. All of those had an
influence and an impact in my own personal career,
and I would give them a lot of gratitude, no
question. And then,
I would say the associate provost who served with
me in the provost office.
Who? Jeanette Ferris, Jerry Gaston,
Bill Perry, Danny Parker, Sally Shepard. I won't
leave anybody out because of all the teams of
people that I had the privilege of working with, we
probably had as effective and efficient team that
got things done as any team of people I ever worked
with in my life. And I told the deans when I took that
position, I said, when you send something up
there, you're gonna get an answer. I said, you're
gonna get a yes, no, or I'm gonna tell you why I can't
give you an answer right now, but it's not gonna get
lost. And you're gonna get a response, you're
gonna get a turnaround, and I'm gonna be decisive.
And I'm going to make what I think is the best
decision for the university. And you know, I
didn't always please them because I had turned
some of them down.
So that would really be the team of people. During
those years with lots of pressure, what did you do
to relax? Well, early when I still had time, I
jogged and got some exercise. Later on, when I was,
the last two or three years of being provost and the
presidency, there were not many times too
relaxed. About the only thing I could do would be go
home at night and just crash in the chair and maybe
watch television or something. But if I were to do
it over again, I personally would try to allocate
some time for particularly exercise. I said, I
don't have time to exercise. Well, you don't. You
have to make time. And you just have to do those
things.
Let's make believe that someone walks up to you
with a check for a million dollars and places only
one restriction on that, and that restriction is
you must pass it to Texas A&M, but you decide what
use will be made of that money. If you had the
opportunity to make a big gift, A&M, what would you
want it to be for? If I had the opportunity to give a
million dollar gift, designate where it went, it
would go to student scholarships. And the reason I
say that is that I probably could not have got
started in college had it not been for some
academic scholarships that were given to me the
first year. And secondly, A&M has protected still
selecting a lot of students that are maybe not from
the wealthy families and they're not in the
highest rank of their class or something. They're
still taking just the students that have to work
for a lot of what they get. And over the years, I've
watched those students And I've had so many of them
come back to me, students who I encouraged to get
in. And I've watched them over the years and their
achievements. And that's been such a great reward
for me to see them. Under your program, would they
be restricted by major or geography? No,
absolutely not. How do you identify which ones are
most deserving? I probably would just simply give
it to the university and ask that it be given to
students based on financial need
to help them to be able to go. I tell you one other
reason, too, in that I saw students, particularly
in the College of Veterinary Medicine, graduate
with such an overwhelming debt. And my wife and I,
right now through our church, adopt about six to
ten students a year that we just kind of become
second parents to while they're here. And there's
a little girl that's the sweetest little girl. Her
mother and dad probably could have never given her
a penny. She worked her way through A&M. She's now
got a terrific job, but she left here with probably
about $30,000 or $40,000 in debt. And if it could
help a girl like that, She's the first one from
either side of her family. In fact, I felt so sorry
for her because her dad did not even come to her
graduation. That broke my heart. In fact, I'd like
to have kicked him. How sad. How sad. Like one of the
things that doesn't have anything to do with this
interview except another good point. Dr.
Williams. at the end of commencements would have
the honor students stand, the 3-5, the 3-7-5, dah,
dah, dah. Then he would say, now I want those
students to stand who are the first in their family
to finish college. Oh, I wish I'd have thought to
have done that. And there would be some mothers
reaching. Oh, man. Then he'd say, but now I want the
most worthy people in this room to stand. The
parents of us. I want the parents of these to stand.
I wish I had known that. I would have done that.
Well, I stole that idea and used it over and over and
over. I would love to have done that. Because most
people don't think that there are still those
situations as often as there are. Oh, there still
are. That's right. Yes. Let's see. Two other
questions.
What does it mean to be an Aggie?
What does it mean to be an Aggie? I bet that
question's been asked and answered millions of
times. To me, it means
to be a graduate and former student
of Texas A&M University.
who has been given something in life that will last
a lifetime.
And that something is in part
the family, the value, the traditions that yield a
purpose
in life.
I don't know, I could add a lot more. Last question.
What are your feelings, what are the feelings that
are in your heart today about A&M? Well, I could
never be more proud of A&M than I am of A&M today.
And, you know, where it stands nationally,
internationally as a university. I travel the
country a lot right now, all over the U.S. And when
people find out that I was a former president of
A&M, they have great respect. And I could not be
more proud of my university than I am of where it is
today and where I think it's going in the future.
I must admit that there are a few things probably
that have been done in the past several years for
political correctness that I would prefer to not
see done. I regret that the anti-discrimination
policy was changed. I regret that I have heard that
they have cut out prayer at football games. I do not
know that, but I heard that recently. I hope that
hasn't happened, and I hope it never happens.
I would never want to see the basic foundations
changed. I think Dr. Bowen has done a superb job. I
stand fully with him in Bonfire, and I honestly
believe I would have taken the exact same actions,
and I just hope and pray that no renegade Bonfire
takes place because that is not action that is
consistent with the Aggie spirit and honor code or
code of honor. That's a great thing.